[Music]
good morning good morning morning
how's everybody doing
that was a cool video
i didn't see it uh-huh yeah you guys are
all worried about me not having that
little spongy thing right there yeah i
think i can
put this one down
how's that
anyways thank you uh so much uh for
welcoming us and i'm thrilled to be here
with matt it's always fun to sit down
with matt
um
and we're also incredibly thankful to
jason and the entire saster team for for
having us so
we have a lot to cover um i'll start off
just a little bit here just the impact
that matt has had
um on the world i think is incredibly
important and we'll get into but i think
starting with myself the impact you've
had on me as a friend as a mentor as a
as a partner as somebody i've got to
have the joy of plugging into his youth
it's a little bit less youthful these
days but when we first met
matt was not of legal drinking age
never seen snow
so he's had a huge impact on me probably
more so than anybody else i've ever
worked with professionally so thank you
and then for us at true
one of the uh amazing things was that
when true was
starting
matt was starting and i was also
starting my first company with tony
schneider who would become your ceo in
the early days uh all within like a kind
of a year of each other and uh the
impact that matt as one of our first
investments at true
you get a lot of your future investments
and so when you end up in things like
peloton or fitbit or duo security or
blue bottle coffee or maker bottle
wherever it is or ring these type of big
companies down the road they all start
on the foundation of the the early
quality logos or brands that you get to
work with so the impact that matt's had
on us as a firm is just just really
crazy so let's talk a little bit about
wordpress i wrote some of these things
down
because
this is a company
i think for those of you paying
attention you're aware of just
how massive the scale is here this is a
public market scale type company that's
still private
um and you know it's profitable uh we
just launched in december i think
wordpress uh five released the gutenberg
release already 33 million correct um he
has a little counter it's funny it
changes by the and by the end of the
speech we'll probably be done another 10
000 people will have done it
um 33 of the entire web runs on
wordpress i want everybody to take a
pause and think about what that means
it's a huge huge huge thing he has a
very big team so i guess my first
question is what's that all feel like
man
it's been a lot of learning
so we are now
you know the reason that automatic got
started was to create
basically we wanted the web to be open
and free and run an open source software
and it was clear that that wasn't going
to happen naturally unless there were
some companies really working on it so
we began to create the software that we
thought could become the default choice
for everyone uh to build something on
the web we want it to be the platform
kind of the base layer that everything
else is built on top of
that's why we track that number of what
percentage of websites
because it shows up what we have to do
we've got 67 left to get to the point
where we can um basically be the open
platform that other things can truly
build on and a true platform in that
far more money is made actually outside
of automatic on the wordpress platform
than is made by the company itself so we
try to be a spark inside the community
we try to contribute a lot and and
obviously i've done well as a result of
that but we always think of ourselves as
one of
part of the community part of a large
ecosystem the balance of which just like
a real ecosystem is delicate and has to
be nurtured to grow
yeah i mean it's um
one of the things i think we spent a
little bit of time talking about and i'd
love for you to share it's like you know
it's such a huge social responsibility
right you have a third of the web
you know running on on your software
um i
i can't even imagine what that feels
like right i mean there's there's you're
an exalted company here with zuckerberg
and a handful of others who just have
such a profound impact on what we're
seeing and what we're not
how in this kind of era of lots of stuff
going on that's sometimes negative how
do you how do you see and embrace that
impact you know from a social
perspective and and what are you
thinking about you know as you as you
kind of veer here into the near future
and in the moment
probably the key difference from a
proprietary platform is a proprietary
platform sort of imposes its values and
business model on you
an open source platform the value it's
imposing is really user control so
putting people in control of how they
want what code they want to run
their business models how they want it
to be how the data flows
um the privacy it can be behind a
firewall it can be on the public cloud
it can be kind of everywhere and so if
there's a value that we're trying to
advocate for it's really that
that kind of freedom of choice
and that's why freedom is actually one
of our
core it's probably our biggest core
value
but it's not free right it takes a lot
of work and it will get to that clear
very early on
that you know we are all human and we
trade a lot of uh autonomy and security
for convenience right like yeah i
believe in this stuff as much as anyone
in the world i still have a facebook
account
you know it's it's just uh we use these
things
but if we can create really compelling
user experiences that create choice that
create freedom that put the hands back
in the control of users to put data back
in the control the people who created it
and creates a ton of economic
opportunity for a broad set of players
around the world
that is really really powerful and
that's kind of the web that if i ever
have kids i want my kids to grow up in
that sort of web that was what i got a
little taste of in kind of the late 90s
early 2000s it's really beautiful yeah
how is that because we'll go back into
your you know the kind of the open
source roots here but you know how is
that all aligned you know with the young
matt mullenweg and your vision
you know when we were first meeting and
talking on the phone um about what you
were doing how how does where you sit
now and where you're looking at a line
with where your vision was then
probably
and well because how you started you you
know
with
i think at the time i had a lot of
naivety around how open source worked
and the idea
you know we used to talk about open
source being like a meritocracy and then
that over the years that really you
learn to
evolve those views where meritocracy
isn't actually a really great way to
describe what's happening um not
everyone is able to put in the time to
show up and contribute and have the
economic ability to so we've definitely
expanded how we think about
uh
people's ability to contribute and how
we sort of foster the contributions from
the parts of the community we need to
create the best possible world changing
product
i think a lot now more about
not just leveraging the open source but
bringing the best minds and developers
and designers from every possible field
and then
applying the the fruit of their work
into the open source sphere
think a lot more about education
so you know when we decide that
the future of wordpress is no longer
going to be php it's really javascript
plus apis
there's now
hundreds of thousands of million plus
developers who really know php really
well and love wordpress and we need to
bring them along that journey
as we're shifting to be you know more of
a javascript native thing it's actually
the majority of code in wordpress now is
now javascript something most people
don't know
wow um
how do you think it's impacted the way
you've built your team
you know i mean wordpress is probably
one of the largest distributed work uh
workforces or work teams um
you know on the planet at this stage and
i just i remember early board meetings
we're going to break we're at
we're 25 people we gotta we gotta bring
them to a consolidated environment and
you know all those kind of discussions
and you know you've always steadfastly
kind of held to that no we'll know when
it's breaking it's not breaking it's
thriving but how is that instructed the
way you've built the team and and and
what do you think the lessons are for
other people that are building sas or
any company to be honest
there's two things that we really
inherited and one i would say is very
much in line with what jay simon just
talked about about open culture
and you know this great story about how
atlassian three weeks before they
announced the slack kipchat thing 3000
people knew inside the company
100 parallel to how automatic works
everything's very very open we have an
internal blogging system much like
confluence but we use something called
p2
um where you can have long form exchange
of asynchronous ideas and discussions
which is to me much more powerful than
chat i actually questioned it this day
whether sort of our chat systems are a
net positive or not negative to our
productivity
so that kind of openness was inherited
from the very beginning and we think
about it you know the majority of the
code we produce in automatic is also
open source whether it's the mobile apps
whether it's calypso which is
wordpress.com you can log into our or
you don't even need to log in you can
look at our github and see the pricing
test we're doing
you can see how much we charge in india
versus america like all that stuff is
all public
and it's okay it's scary to be that open
at first because you think that
your competitors are gonna look at it
and you know what they probably do but
it doesn't matter
and the benefits of that
forcing yourself to be a bit more open
pays a lot of dividends particularly as
you build for the long term as you think
about decades not just years
the second thing that you hit on is
distributed work so from the beginning
the open source contributors
uh most open source projects run with
people from all over the world who are
passionate about it contributing we
decided to build a company that way
in the beginning was not pretty it was
kind of heterodox and lots of brilliant
investors and really smart people tried
to talk me out of it and passed on
investing because of it not me
so thank you for that just for the
record
but now i would say that's completely
shifted like i would say if you're going
to spend 100 grand a month on offers in
san francisco you have to justify that
more than you have to keep the five
being distributed now and so it's
completely flipped and that's kind of
beautiful to watch i'm actually working
on a book about distributed work
um that'll be coming out hopefully later
this year
because just to kind of document all the
best practices it's not just us like
elastics ipo yeah there are over a
thousand people public market ipo both
based on open source and totally
distributed company and there's tons and
tons of examples now and that's before
you even dig into the companies that are
centralized but actually operate in
addition decentralized fashion they just
don't own up to it do you think how's
the team or when you're recruiting
somebody new or how does the team think
i mean when they're in iowa or ireland
or
armenia or wherever they are
do they think of themselves as working
for a silicon valley based uh
you know uh company or
you know uh
a company of the world i mean like what
what are they how do you
how do you leverage that because i know
we taught we had an office at one point
in time then we kind of moved away to a
different you know smaller
more modest stuff like why you know
or how does that work
we we try to be native to the web more
than anything uh it is you know if any
of you are building companies and teams
it's an incredible competitive advantage
to be able to offer an opportunity to
amazing developers around the world to
work on a world-class web-changing thing
and if you're here you're probably in
the top one percent of all startups and
things in the world so if you can offer
that
opportunity to talent which is
definitely equally distributed it's uh
it's very compelling so they don't have
to move they can live in melbourne or
something but work on
one that's competing head-to-head with
some of the largest public and uh and
private companies yeah i remember when i
um when i started sphere uh with martin
and steve and tony
and um
we thought about
you know should we and by just by virtue
of the co-founders two of them lived in
different cities right so we ended up
starting off as like a distributed team
and i remember thinking like that'll
never work right this is at the
beginning i mean we were you were
starting i'm starting all these things
were happening at the same time and we
just kept going with it and i remember
the power when it unlocked for me it was
like such a meritocracy in terms of the
way i viewed my team either they
committed code on time or they didn't it
worked or it didn't they were you know
easy and pleasant to work with or they
weren't but all the water cooler stuff
all that you know
interaction do you think there's a
downside though to not having and how do
you well how do you go about it with
wordpress because i know we do do a lot
of stuff here to make sure there's
physical interaction but like
how are you provoking that and how do
you think about that
yeah i i wouldn't call a downside as
much as a trade-off
so it i really love the people i work
with and i wish i could see them every
day
from the early days i mean when they
said you need to get everyone in the
same room they were actually right we
just do it once a year instead of every
day and so that's really been helpful
for us you know the meetup culture
inside
automatic
is pretty strong you know we have 120
teams that get together individually on
their own like one to three times per
year each so pretty much every week of
the year there's a few meetups going on
and then we take time and a pretty
significant investment it's now millions
of dollars to bring everyone in the
company together for a week a year uh
which
we do all over the world but it's um
i think it's important to have that
touch point uh to bring people together
but it's kind of surreal to me because
like uh last year i think we hired 240
people so from year to year
uh that grand meet up the place where we
had everyone in a room uh smaller than
this but still everyone in the room
it always kind of never fails to shock
me to look out over
the sea of amazing people you're like
this is a real company
sometimes it feels a little more
sometimes does it still not feel like a
real cup it's not just avatars on slack
you know it's like
a lot of people and they fill a big room
and they consume a lot of bacon and
coffee
[Laughter]
it's amazing well if it's good for blue
bottle coffee sales we're down with that
um
let's talk a little bit about the early
days because i think one of the things
that um i found really interesting
through my own personal journey with
wordpress because i've been there almost
from the beginning
was how people thought it was just a
kind of a fun project and not a not a
real company but i think you set the
tone and i think people would be
surprised to learn here that we've
always
always had revenue from the absolutely
inception of this company and i think
for the most part we were we've been
profitable for a big majority of our
days together
how did you
make that transition that's a tricky
transition for an open source project
to move into a for-profit kind of sphere
and i'm just like how did you move to
the subscription revenue i actually
don't remember it was so seamless but i
don't remember like what you must have
struggled with or thought through and
then what were the steps you put in
place to do that because i think a lot
of companies
uh maybe even here you know there might
be some pre-revenue companies here
they're going with that same thing that
freemium model and how does that all
work
it was there's two key things and we
were a little different from what came
before because a lot of the open source
companies out there including like
inelastic tend to have a much more
enterprise model and what we've created
automatic with wordpress.com and jetpack
and woocommerce is more of a consumer
and developer driven model but there's
not like a
it's not a huge enterprise sales force
it's not like all these sorts of things
um you know the average person pays us
112 bucks a year or something you know
so we're very much on more the consumer
end of uh of subscribers and growing a
subscription business
the first key was we didn't fork the
software
so the wordpress that we run on
wordpress.com serving you know tens of
billions of requests
is the same that you can download from
the website wordpress.org
so that
that meant that all the developments and
all the sort of scale all the
the bottlenecks we were finding and
fixing in that sort of
you know massive sas version of the
software the benefits are all going to
the self-hosted version the one you
could download and that allowed us to
create a cloud model which is fairly
unique in the space and why now
even though automatic does not look at
the
work on the enterprise side too much
there's a lot of companies in the
enterprise side of wordpress including
wp engine they've been incredibly
successful now over 100 million in ar i
think they announced um
working just on enterprise wordpress and
what they can sell is saying okay we can
run it for you um you could also
download it and run it yourself and
there's a hybrid model so you can
download and run it yourself and use a
plug-in we make called jetpack which is
kind of like icloud for wordpress it
hooks you into the best parts of the
cloud for backups for security for all
the sorts of things that you can do
better
in a sort of
uh centralized model
but that's totally optional so you can
have the best of both you can get
control of all the code but the best of
cloud services without having to host it
with us so that kind of model ended up
being tremendously successful i think
one that'd be very interesting for more
sas companies to explore as we're here
for this audience
and the second thing was we worked just
as hard at growing the wider ecosystem
as growing automatics revenue
so you mean by that like like i did a
lot of study of successful
uh computing platforms uh so i read a
lot of like computer history books
studied microsoft a ton and this number
kept coming up you know when windows 95
launched one of the things that they
talked about is for every dollar
how many people were alive when windows
that wasn't live on everybody alive how
many were of legal drinking age actually
23 was 95. someone would be 23 or 24
years old so maybe not um
wow
when windows 95 launched one of the
things they talked about was for every
dollar they they made selling windows
there were twenty dollars made
on top of it
and you look at platforms throughout the
days even going back to like early unix
and darpanet type stuff like there were
these there's this one to 20 ratio over
and over and over and over again and so
how that works out is the most
successful platforms would only capture
about five percent of the revenue that
was happening on top of them
um we can all think of unsuccessful
platforms as well or platforms that were
kind of a bait and switch facebook
platform the twitter platform cool
companies but like their platforms were
not truly platforms because as soon as
companies started to get really big on
them zynga etc they pulled the carpet
out from under them and they didn't
actually truly have they didn't truly
own those relationships with customers
or the distribution means or anything
like that and so that's why
if you looked at
let's say a proprietary competitor like
wix they make a lot of revenue but they
probably make 90 of the revenue in their
given market so they're like 600 million
the whole thing is probably 650. um
for us we estimate the um the kind of
wordpress ecosystem to be over 10
billion per year now
and that i think about growing that as
much as growing anything else and that's
not even counting that's like what's in
that revenue going through woocommerce
and things like that yeah what's in that
ecosystem i mean i mean kind of
everything but like you know what are
the were the big buckets every part of
it so hosting is a huge one so any major
web host you know from godaddy on
usually half or more of their customers
are wordpress customers oh wow um
it is services so from the low end like
you go on craigslist or fiverr and ask
for someone to build your website
they're probably gonna build around
wordpress
uh you go to the high end big agencies
you know that employ hundreds and
hundreds of people doing sites that cost
millions of dollars to build they're
using wordpress uh at the highest levels
of government to
you know the largest enterprises they're
they're using wordpress and so that's
part of that ecosystem and there's more
and more also all the things you sell on
top of it
so there's themes there's plugins
there's services there's you know seo
platforms there's so much that really
piggybacks on it
and um
that's we think of that as the direct
thing there's also the people who start
with wordpress and end up someplace else
we just heard a great story from jason
that saster started as his blog
yeah we wouldn't count this as built on
wordpress or part of that ecosystem but
i love those stories as well that it can
serve as a launching point groupon also
started as a wordpress blog it can serve
as like the thing that kind of kicks off
the idea or allows you to test something
um to get to that kind of minimum viable
product and then you build whatever it
is that's going to serve your customers
and your audience best and you see that
as success
right 100
because we're enabling well what i hope
is that even when people launch from
wordpress into something else that they
can carry forward some of that user
centricity open source and open data
kind of those principles that are in the
key of open source for what they create
in the future and that hopefully as we
become more successful that also proves
that you can do this you can
be a truly open source company that is
aligned with its users aligned with its
community and be very commercially
successful as well there weren't that
many examples of it before yeah a lot of
the examples were more cautionary you'd
be like oh craigslist was amazing i
think today and even even today it's
it's somewhat antithetical to the way a
lot of people build companies the way
that the market kind of approaches this
stuff it's um
you know i think it it's it shows the
connectivity back to the roots right of
open source and open and free and like
doing good and i think it's it's uh
thank you
thank you for being that person yeah it
definitely gets tested so there'll be
times when your chief competitor copies
your codes
there'll be times when you know amazon's
not being the best open source how does
that feel
uh well your immediate reaction is like
very it's your reptile brain kicks in
right you're immediately like oh we
gotta close it off we gotta change the
license you've seen and elastic
both dancing with aws and kind of like
ways that are honestly not great for
either of them um
versus leaning into it
okay uh we had a point early on where
this was super super early on where
someone took
the wordpress multi-site code that we
were creating for wordpress.com and
started a competitor
that uh started growing faster than us
but then we had a very like it was sort
of like a very eye-opening thing where
we said well if they're taking our own
software and doing better than us
bad on us
and then you start to dig in and say
okay we're both selling the exact same
thing wordpress what are they doing
differently and it really woke us up to
they had way better uh conversion funnel
they had way better marketing they had
sort of easier onboarding and so it
wasn't this by the way
they didn't need our software to compete
with us but it really kind of clarified
the differences where we were not
executing as well
but i also say that like
it might seem scary but people can also
just build their own version
yeah you know one of the things i've
i've long admired and loved about
sitting around the table and watching is
it's not so much that you're breaking
the rules
you know it's that you're thoughtful
about
how you want to approach things it turns
out that it ends up being
upside down from the way a lot of others
kind of approach things right um
and i've always i've always just i've
always just kind of marveled at it i
mean you've tested you've tested
you think all of us have been around the
table there's been a few times you're
like what
and we make mistakes too so it's just
all about being flexible but when you
admit that and move on and pivot you're
fine yeah what's something um what's
something along the journey here that um
you know this is just a random question
you may not have an answer but like
what's something that you didn't do you
thought like we'll never be that company
we'll never do that or that's not
it's not part of what we do and and and
then in hindsight you look and go oh no
no no actually we you know i know is it
like a physical office or the fact that
we're advertising now and like you know
like is there stuff like that
you know they're both really silly
examples i'm almost embarrassed to say
them to this audience but i really
thought uh we didn't do marketing for
far too long and so we just did zero
and i'm aware buy just on organic growth
for a long long time but as the market
heated up i mean we're in a spot where
when you mean you saw super bowl
commercials for our competitors there's
over 400 million dollars per year being
spent on advertising in our space
and so
you can't you can't not do some of that
or it does start to add up and the other
one's super silly is like um scheduling
uh you
for our support roles and everything
like that like we went a really long
time without people like making a
schedule
they were going to be working or not it
was just kind of out all ad hoc and that
eventually started to impact kind of
customer service you know the
availability we'd have too many people
at certain times and other people at
other times this is so embarrassingly
simple like we went a very long time
without doing that and now we have
scheduling and but when we first started
there was a lot of pushback to it on the
team
uh because it does remove some kind of
like the world is on weekend and yeah we
don't work saturday
is it that click that it's
not um
you maintain flexibility we don't
prescribe which hours people have to
work
but we say there is a minimum amount and
you lose a spontaneity
so you can't if you're in one of these
roles that has a schedule you can't wake
up and be like oh it's beautiful outside
i'm going to go for a two hour run or
something
all right let's um
we're running we've got a couple minutes
here so i'd love to
i'm going to skip through i had a bunch
of stuff i wanted to talk about
flexibility and the improvements in
gutenberg but i think we can wait i'll
say one thing there if you looked at
wordpress five or ten years ago and
developed a view of it please give it
another go around it is i completely
reimagined completely rewritten software
that probably has aligns with you
philosophically and the principles that
you actually care about and is now
it gets better every couple months so
it's moving fast i would love for you
just to touch on a little bit on user
privacy and control
right
which i think is such a
foundational piece of
your philosophy and what we do but
how do you think about that and
how does that translate to
to this particular audience
you know i think it's one of those
things
that will look back 20 or 30 years from
now at how
data is being used and spread and
weaponized and
really say that maybe akin to
doctors recommending cigarettes like
that we were we were fooling ourselves
uh to the sort of societal and personal
impacts
of
the approaches we're taking to
user data to privacy to advertising
which is not going to be sustainable
long term what
gives me hope is things unfortunately
some political things as well have woken
up mainstream society to the uh misuse
of these platforms
um that's that not actually misuse it's
what they were designed to do
maybe not designed to do it for russia
they were designed to do it for colgate
or swiffer or something but
they can be turned very very easily
towards any direction so as we want to
maintain agency
it's going to be more important for us
to take control of our time and our
attention
i think that's amazing
um you've got a book you mentioned
you've got a book coming up or you're
hoping is it are you on a deadline
uh keep an eye on my blog ma.tt uh just
m-a-t-t nothing else before or after and
that's where i'll put announcements and
i'll start doing some podcasts and
interviews actually with uh distributed
founders and distributed hr people and
things like that because i'm really
trying to collect all the best practices
and in fact if you are distributed and
have found something that you think is
amazing and you want everyone to know uh
please send it my way because i'm going
to be promoting kind of the best
practices for how to build these
companies because i do really believe
it's the future
of the work in the world
it's amazing listen um it's a privilege
always to i get to spend a little bit
more time with you than everybody in
this audience but hopefully
you've enjoyed this it's uh it's uh i
think it's a rare treat i think we're
sitting i used to always describe matt
um you know as i talked to my wife or my
kids or everybody i said you know matt's
a once-in-a-generation uh founder and uh
i'm just so privileged to uh and and
have enjoyed so immensely just
partnering with you and learning thank
you thank you and thank you all thank
you